---
layout: single
title:  "The Performance impact of Async and Promises in JavaScript"
tags:
  - JavaScript
  - Promises
  - Callbacks
categories:
  - JavaScript
  - Webpage Performance
---
# 

> *Your Promises and Async may inadvertently be choking your Callbacks and adversely impacting the user experience.*

# Introduction
You want to make long calculations in your javascript program and may decide to use promises or async to carry out the heavy lifting while the main program runs without waiting for the heavyly loaded function to complete. so that the main program does not freeze while carrying out the heavy lifting inside the async / promise functions. Any JavaScript program will invariably as contain some callbacks especially when used for front end. The UI or the user experience may rest on the performance of these callbacks. 

Little will you realise that the callbacks may be choked by your promise / async functions. We will try to understand this wiht the help of the code snippet given below. The code has following three functions

1. Simple synchronous callback function
2. SimpleTimeOut which is a async callback function.
3. EimpleTimeOut wrapped inside the Promises.
4. asynv function doing the heavy work load.

In the output we realise that the Simple Time out callback funtion is running in the end even though it has the timeout interval of 0 millisecons, whereas the async/promise functions having much laonger calculation time are being executed before. 

This unexpected behaviour may adversly impact the user experience and discourage the person from visiting the webpage.

# Explanation

In order to understand this behavoiur we need to have some understanding of how the callbacks, promises and async work in V8 JavaScript Engine. In this blog we will try to deconstruct them with the help of code snippets and how they behave under the hood.

The diagram here shows the JavaScript runtime. The promises were relatively new to the JavaScript. Earlier we had callback queue or task queue to handle asynchronous callbacks which we part of Web API. With introduction of promises we had a native way to handle asynchronous code. The JavaScript committee decided to have an additional queue to handle promises called job queue or microtask queue.

The microtask queue is similar to the task queue or the callback queue but has a higher priority than callback queue. This means that the event loop is going to check the microtask queue first and make sure that there's nothing in that queue before it starts looking at the callback queue or the task queue.
